Dumbbell Bench Press	Chest	Dumbbell	Beginner	9.2	 1. Lie down on a flat bench with a dumbbell in each hand resting on top of your thighs. The palms of your hands will be facing each other. 2. Then, using your thighs to help raise the dumbbells up, lift the dumbbells one at a time so that you can hold them in front of you at shoulder width. 3. Once at shoulder width, rotate your wrists forward so that the palms of your hands are facing away from you. The dumbbells should be just to the sides of your chest, with your upper arm and forearm creating a 90 degree angle. Be sure to maintain full control of the dumbbells at all times. This will be your starting position. 4. Then, as you breathe out, use your chest to push the dumbbells up. Lock your arms at the top of the lift and squeeze your chest, hold for a second and then begin coming down slowly. Tip: Ideally, lowering the weight should take about twice as long as raising it. 5. Repeat the movement for the prescribed amount of repetitions of your training program.
Pushups	Chest	Body Only	Beginner	9.2	 1. Lie on the floor face down and place your hands about 36 inches apart while holding your torso up at arms length. 2. Next, lower yourself downward until your chest almost touches the floor as you inhale. 3. Now breathe out and press your upper body back up to the starting position while squeezing your chest. 4. After a brief pause at the top contracted position, you can begin to lower yourself downward again for as many repetitions as needed.
Dumbbell Flyes	Chest	Dumbbell	Beginner	9.1	 1. Lie down on a flat bench with a dumbbell on each hand resting on top of your thighs. The palms of your hand will be facing each other. 2. Then using your thighs to help raise the dumbbells, lift the dumbbells one at a time so you can hold them in front of you at shoulder width with the palms of your hands facing each other. Raise the dumbbells up like you're pressing them, but stop and hold just before you lock out. This will be your starting position. 3. With a slight bend on your elbows in order to prevent stress at the biceps tendon, lower your arms out at both sides in a wide arc until you feel a stretch on your chest. Breathe in as you perform this portion of the movement. Tip: Keep in mind that throughout the movement, the arms should remain stationary; the movement should only occur at the shoulder joint. 4. Return your arms back to the starting position as you squeeze your chest muscles and breathe out. Tip: Make sure to use the same arc of motion used to lower the weights. 5. Hold for a second at the contracted position and repeat the movement for the prescribed amount of repetitions.
Incline Dumbbell Press	Chest	Dumbbell	Beginner	9.1	 1. Lie back on an incline bench with a dumbbell in each hand atop your thighs. The palms of your hands will be facing each other. 2. Then, using your thighs to help push the dumbbells up, lift the dumbbells one at a time so that you can hold them at shoulder width. 3. Once you have the dumbbells raised to shoulder width, rotate your wrists forward so that the palms of your hands are facing away from you. This will be your starting position. 4. Be sure to keep full control of the dumbbells at all times. Then breathe out and push the dumbbells up with your chest. 5. Lock your arms at the top, hold for a second, and then start slowly lowering the weight. Tip Ideally, lowering the weights should take about twice as long as raising them. 6. Repeat the movement for the prescribed amount of repetitions. 7. When you are done, place the dumbbells back on your thighs and then on the floor. This is the safest manner to release the dumbbells.
Low Cable Crossover	Chest	Cable	Beginner	9.1	 1. To move into the starting position, place the pulleys at the low position, select the resistance to be used and grasp a handle in each hand. 2. Step forward, gaining tension in the pulleys. Your palms should be facing forward, hands below the waist, and your arms straight. This will be your starting position. 3. With a slight bend in your arms, draw your hands upward and toward the midline of your body. Your hands should come together in front of your chest, palms facing up. 4. Return your arms back to the starting position after a brief pause.
Decline Dumbbell Flyes	Chest	Dumbbell	Beginner	9	 1. Secure your legs at the end of the decline bench and lie down with a dumbbell on each hand on top of your thighs. The palms of your hand will be facing each other. 2. Once you are laying down, move the dumbbells in front of you at shoulder width. The palms of the hands should be facing each other and the arms should be perpendicular to the floor and fully extended. This will be your starting position. 3. With a slight bend on your elbows in order to prevent stress at the biceps tendon, lower your arms out at both sides in a wide arc until you feel a stretch on your chest. Breathe in as you perform this portion of the movement. Tip: Keep in mind that throughout the movement, the arms should remain stationary; the movement should only occur at the shoulder joint. 4. Return your arms back to the starting position as you squeeze your chest muscles and breathe out. Tip: Make sure to use the same arc of motion used to lower the weights. 5. Hold for a second at the contracted position and repeat the movement for the prescribed amount of repetitions.
Dips - Chest Version	Chest	Other	Intermediate	9	 1. For this exercise you will need access to parallel bars. To get yourself into the starting position, hold your body at arms length (arms locked) above the bars. 2. While breathing in, lower yourself slowly with your torso leaning forward around 30 degrees or so and your elbows flared out slightly until you feel a slight stretch in the chest. 3. Once you feel the stretch, use your chest to bring your body back to the starting position as you breathe out. Tip: Remember to squeeze the chest at the top of the movement for a second. 4. Repeat the movement for the prescribed amount of repetitions.
Barbell Bench Press - Medium Grip	Chest	Barbell	Beginner	9	 1. Lie back on a flat bench. Using a medium width grip (a grip that creates a 90-degree angle in the middle of the movement between the forearms and the upper arms), lift the bar from the rack and hold it straight over you with your arms locked. This will be your starting position. 2. From the starting position, breathe in and begin coming down slowly until the bar touches your middle chest. 3. After a brief pause, push the bar back to the starting position as you breathe out. Focus on pushing the bar using your chest muscles. Lock your arms and squeeze your chest in the contracted position at the top of the motion, hold for a second and then start coming down slowly again. Tip: Ideally, lowering the weight should take about twice as long as raising it. 4. Repeat the movement for the prescribed amount of repetitions. 5. When you are done, place the bar back in the rack.
Bodyweight Flyes	Chest	E-Z Curl Bar	Intermediate	9	 1. Position two equally loaded EZ bars on the ground next to each other. Ensure they are able to roll. 2. Assume a push-up position over the bars, supporting your weight on your toes and hands with your arms extended and body straight. 3. Place your hands on the bars. This will be your starting position. 4. Using a slow and controlled motion, move your hands away from the midline of your body, rolling the bars apart. Inhale during this portion of the motion. 5. After moving the bars as far apart as you can, return to the starting position by pulling them back together. Exhale as you perform this movement.
Incline Cable Flye	Chest	Cable	Intermediate	9	 1. To get yourself into the starting position, set the pulleys at the floor level (lowest level possible on the machine that is below your torso). 2. Place an incline bench (set at 45 degrees) in between the pulleys, select a weight on each one and grab a pulley on each hand. 3. With a handle on each hand, lie on the incline bench and bring your hands together at arms length in front of your face. This will be your starting position. 4. With a slight bend of your elbows (in order to prevent stress at the biceps tendon), lower your arms out at both sides in a wide arc until you feel a stretch on your chest. Breathe in as you perform this portion of the movement. Tip: Keep in mind that throughout the movement, the arms should remain stationary. The movement should only occur at the shoulder joint. 5. Return your arms back to the starting position as you squeeze your chest muscles and exhale. Hold the contracted position for a second. Tip: Make sure to use the same arc of motion used to lower the weights. 6. Repeat the movement for the prescribed amount of repetitions.
Wide-Grip Decline Barbell Bench Press	Chest	Barbell	Intermediate	8.9	 1. Lie back on a decline bench with the feet securely locked at the front of the bench. Using a wide, pronated (palms forward) grip that is around 3 inches away from shoulder width (for each hand), lift the bar from the rack and hold it straight over you with your arms locked. The bar will be perpendicular to the torso and the floor. This will be your starting position. 2. As you breathe in, come down slowly until you feel the bar on your lower chest. 3. After a second pause, bring the bar back to the starting position as you breathe out and push the bar using your chest muscles. Lock your arms and squeeze your chest in the contracted position, hold for a second and then start coming down slowly again. Tip: It should take at least twice as long to go down than to come up. 4. Repeat the movement for the prescribed amount of repetitions.
Incline Dumbbell Press Reverse-Grip	Chest	Dumbbell	Intermediate	8.9	 1. Lay on an incline bench holding a dumbbell in each hand. Begin with your arms extended above your torso with a supinated grip. 2. Your back should be arched, feet driving through the ground, and lats tight. This will be your starting position. 3. Lower the weights to your chest by flexing the elbows. 4. After a brief pause, return the weights to the starting position by extending the elbows
Wide-Grip Barbell Bench Press	Chest	Barbell	Intermediate	8.9	 1. Lie back on a flat bench with feet firm on the floor. Using a wide, pronated (palms forward) grip that is around 3 inches away from shoulder width (for each hand), lift the bar from the rack and hold it straight over you with your arms locked. The bar will be perpendicular to the torso and the floor. This will be your starting position. 2. As you breathe in, come down slowly until you feel the bar on your middle chest. 3. After a second pause, bring the bar back to the starting position as you breathe out and push the bar using your chest muscles. Lock your arms and squeeze your chest in the contracted position, hold for a second and then start coming down slowly again. Tip: It should take at least twice as long to go down than to come up. 4. Repeat the movement for the prescribed amount of repetitions.
Decline Barbell Bench Press	Chest	Barbell	Beginner	8.9	 1. Secure your legs at the end of the decline bench and slowly lay down on the bench. 2. Using a medium width grip (a grip that creates a 90-degree angle in the middle of the movement between the forearms and the upper arms), lift the bar from the rack and hold it straight over you with your arms locked. The arms should be perpendicular to the floor. This will be your starting position. Tip: In order to protect your rotator cuff, it is best if you have a spotter help you lift the barbell off the rack. 3. As you breathe in, come down slowly until you feel the bar on your lower chest. 4. After a second pause, bring the bar back to the starting position as you breathe out and push the bar using your chest muscles. Lock your arms and squeeze your chest in the contracted position, hold for a second and then start coming down slowly again. Tip: It should take at least twice as long to go down than to come up). 5. Repeat the movement for the prescribed amount of repetitions. 6. When you are done, place the bar back in the rack.
Incline Push-Up	Chest	Body Only	Beginner	8.8	 1. Stand facing bench or sturdy elevated platform. Place hands on edge of bench or platform, slightly wider than shoulder width. 2. Position forefoot back from bench or platform with arms and body straight. Arms should be perpendicular to body. Keeping body straight, lower chest to edge of box or platform by bending arms. 3. Push body up until arms are extended. Repeat.
Incline Dumbbell Flyes	Chest	Dumbbell	Beginner	8.8	 1. Hold a dumbbell on each hand and lie on an incline bench that is set to an incline angle of no more than 30 degrees. 2. Extend your arms above you with a slight bend at the elbows. 3. Now rotate the wrists so that the palms of your hands are facing you. Tip: The pinky fingers should be next to each other. This will be your starting position. 4. As you breathe in, start to slowly lower the arms to the side while keeping the arms extended and while rotating the wrists until the palms of the hand are facing each other. Tip: At the end of the movement the arms will be by your side with the palms facing the ceiling. 5. As you exhale start to bring the dumbbells back up to the starting position by reversing the motion and rotating the hands so that the pinky fingers are next to each other again. Tip: Keep in mind that the movement will only happen at the shoulder joint and at the wrist. There is no motion that happens at the elbow joint. 6. Repeat for the recommended amount of repetitions.
Cable Crossover	Chest	Cable	Beginner	8.8	 1. To get yourself into the starting position, place the pulleys on a high position (above your head), select the resistance to be used and hold the pulleys in each hand. 2. Step forward in front of an imaginary straight line between both pulleys while pulling your arms together in front of you. Your torso should have a small forward bend from the waist. This will be your starting position. 3. With a slight bend on your elbows in order to prevent stress at the biceps tendon, extend your arms to the side (straight out at both sides) in a wide arc until you feel a stretch on your chest. Breathe in as you perform this portion of the movement. Tip: Keep in mind that throughout the movement, the arms and torso should remain stationary; the movement should only occur at the shoulder joint. 4. Return your arms back to the starting position as you breathe out. Make sure to use the same arc of motion used to lower the weights. 5. Hold for a second at the starting position and repeat the movement for the prescribed amount of repetitions.
Neck Press	Chest	Barbell	Intermediate	8.8	 1. Lie back on a flat bench. Using a medium-width grip (a grip that creates a 90-degree angle in the middle of the movement between the forearms and the upper arms), lift the bar from the rack and hold it straight over your neck with your arms locked. This will be your starting position. 2. As you breathe in, come down slowly until you feel the bar on your neck. 3. After a second pause, bring the bar back to the starting position as you breathe out and push the bar using your chest muscles. Lock your arms and squeeze your chest in the contracted position, hold for a second and then start coming down slowly again. Tip: It should take at least twice as long to go down than to come up). 4. Repeat the movement for the prescribed amount of repetitions. 5. When you are done, place the bar back in the rack.
Drop Push	Chest	Other	Intermediate	8.8	 1. Position low boxes or other platforms 2-3 feet apart. 2. Move to a pushup position between them, supporting yourself by placing your hands on the boxes. 3. With good posture, drop from the platforms by pressing up and moving your hands to shoulder width, cushioning your landing by absorbing the impact through the arm.
Barbell Incline Bench Press Medium-Grip	Chest	Barbell	Beginner	8.8	 1. Load the bar to an appropriate weight for your training. 2. Lay on the bench with your feet flat on the ground, driving through to your hips. Your back should be arched, and your shoulder blades retracted. 3. Take a medium, pronated grip covering the rings on the bar. Remove the bar from the rack, holding the weight above your chest with your arms extended. This will be your starting position. 4. Lower the bar to the sternum by flexing the elbows. Maintain control and do not bounce the bar off of your chest. Your lats should stay tight and elbows slightly drawn in. 5. After touching your torso with the bar, extend the elbows to return the bar to the starting position.
Incline Push-Up Medium	Chest	Body Only	Beginner	8.7	 1. Stand facing a Smith machine bar or sturdy elevated platform at an appropriate height. 2. Place your hands on the bar, with your hands about shoulder width apart. 3. Position your feet back from the bar with arms and body straight. This will be your starting position. 4. Keeping your body straight, lower your chest to the bar by bending the arms. 5. Return to the starting position by extending the elbows, pressing yourself back up.
Incline Cable Chest Press	Chest	Cable	Beginner	8.7	 1. Adjust the weight to an appropriate amount and be seated, grasping the handles. Your upper arms should be about 45 degrees to the body, with your head and chest up. The elbows should be bent to about 90 degrees. This will be your starting position. 2. Begin by extending through the elbow, pressing the handles together straight in front of you. Keep your shoulder blades retracted as you execute the movement. 3. After pausing at full extension, return to the starting position, keeping tension on the cables.
Cable Chest Press	Chest	Cable	Beginner	8.7	 1. Adjust the weight to an appropriate amount and be seated, grasping the handles. Your upper arms should be about 45 degrees to the body, with your head and chest up. The elbows should be bent to about 90 degrees. This will be your starting position. 2. Begin by extending through the elbow, pressing the handles together straight in front of you. Keep your shoulder blades retracted as you execute the movement. 3. After pausing at full extension, return to th starting position, keeping tension on the cables. 4. You can also execute this movement with your back off the pad, at an incline or decline, or alternate hands.
Dumbbell Bench Press with Neutral Grip	Chest	Dumbbell	Beginner	8.7	 1. Take a dumbbell in each hand and lay back onto a flat bench. Your feet should be flat on the floor and your shoulder blades retracted. 2. Maintaining a neutral grip, palms facing each other, begin with your arms extended directly above you, perpendicular to the floor. This will be your starting position. 3. Begin the movement by flexing the elbow, lowering the upper arms to the side. Descend until the dumbbells are to your torso. 4. Pause, then extend the elbow and return to the starting position.
Leverage Incline Chest Press	Chest	Machine	Beginner	8.6	 1. Load an appropriate weight onto the pins and adjust the seat for your height. The handles should be near the top of the pectorals at the beginning of the motion. Your chest and head should be up and your shoulder blades retracted. This will be your starting position. 2. Press the handles forward by extending through the elbow. 3. After a brief pause at the top, return the weight just above the start position, keeping tension on the muscles by not returning the weight to the stops until the set is complete.
Single-Arm Push-Up	Chest	Body Only	Intermediate	8.6	 1. Begin laying prone on the ground. Move yourself into a position supporting your weight on your toes and one arm. Your working arm should be placed directly under the shoulder, fully extended. Your legs should be extended, and for this movement you may need a wider base, placing your feet further apart than in a normal push-up. 2. Maintain good posture, and place your free hand behind your back. This will be your starting position. 3. Lower yourself by allowing the elbow to flex until you touch the ground. 4. Descend slowly, and reverse direction be extending the arm to return to the starting position.
Single-Arm Cable Crossover	Chest	Cable	Beginner	8.6	 1. Begin by moving the pulleys to the high position, select the resistance to be used, and take a handle in each hand. 2. Step forward in front of both pulleys with your arms extended in front of you, bringing your hands together. Your head and chest should be up as you lean forward, while your feet should be staggered. This will be your starting position. 3. Keeping your left arm in place, allow your right arm to extend out to the side, maintaining a slight bend at the elbow. The right arm should be perpendicular to the body at approximately shoulder level. 4. Return your arm back to the starting position by pulling your hand back to the midline of the body. 5. Hold for a second at the starting position and repeat the movement on the opposite side. Continue alternating back and forth for the prescribed number of repetitions.
Decline Push-Up	Chest	None	Beginner	8.6	 1. Lie on the floor face down and place your hands about 36 inches apart while holding your torso up at arms length. Move your feet up to a box or bench. This will be your starting position. 2. Next, lower yourself downward until your chest almost touches the floor as you inhale. 3. Now breathe out and press your upper body back up to the starting position while squeezing your chest. 4. After a brief pause at the top contracted position, you can begin to lower yourself downward again for as many repetitions as needed.
Hammer Grip Incline DB Bench Press	Chest	Dumbbell	Beginner	8.5	 1. Lie back on an incline bench with a dumbbell on each hand on top of your thighs. The palms of your hand will be facing each other. 2. By using your thighs to help you get the dumbbells up, clean the dumbbells one arm at a time so that you can hold them at shoulder width. 3. Once at shoulder width, keep the palms of your hands with a neutral grip (palms facing each other). Keep your elbows flared out with the upper arms in line with the shoulders (perpendicular to the torso) and the elbows bent creating a 90-degree angle between the upper arm and the forearm. This will be your starting position. 4. Now bring down the weights slowly to your side as you breathe in. Keep full control of the dumbbells at all times. 5. As you breathe out, push the dumbbells up using your pectoral muscles. Lock your arms in the contracted position, hold for a second and then start coming down slowly. Tip: It should take at least twice as long to go down than to come up. 6. Repeat the movement for the prescribed amount of repetitions. 7. When you are done, place the dumbbells back in your thighs and then on the floor. This is the safest manner to dispose of the dumbbells.
Pushups (Close and Wide Hand Positions)	Chest	Body Only	Beginner	8.5	 1. Lie on the floor face down and body straight with your toes on the floor and the hands wider than shoulder width for a wide hand position and closer than shoulder width for a close hand position. Make sure you are holding your torso up at arms length. 2. Lower yourself until your chest almost touches the floor as you inhale. 3. Using your pectoral muscles, press your upper body back up to the starting position and squeeze your chest. Breathe out as you perform this step. 4. After a second pause at the contracted position, repeat the movement for the prescribed amount of repetitions.
